It's eight o'clock. You've had your dinner and finished your homework.
You've taken a bath and brushed your teeth. You're ready to put on your
pajamas and hop into bed with a book.
"Hold it!" you say. "It's too early to go to bed!" But it probably isn't. Did you
know that most kids your age need about 10 hours of sleep? If you have to
wake up early, you should go to bed early, too! Does your Mom or Dad have
to wake you up each morning? If you often have trouble waking up on your
own, you may not be getting enough sleep.
Why is sleep important? Sleep gives your body a chance to rest. Your
muscles relax. Your heart slows down. Your body takes a break and builds
energy for the next day. Sleep also helps your body heal when you are sick.
It helps your body grow. And sleep is very important for your brain, too.
Your brain is the command center for your body. All day long your brain is
hard at work. It takes in all kinds of information. It uses that information to
tell your body how to respond. For example, on a hot day you might feel
very warm. Your brain sends signals to your skin to make you sweat so that
you'll cool off. As you're playing baseball, your eyes tell your brain that a
ball is flying toward you. Your brain sends signals to your arms. You swing
the bat and hit the ball! Your brain takes charge of mental tasks, too. It
tells you how to spell words on your spelling test. It stores facts like your
telephone number. It remembers the multiplication table. Every moment of
every day, your brain is busy.
When you go to sleep, your brain does not "turn off." But at least it gets
a break from taking in information. Some scientists think your brain does
an important job while you sleep. They think it sorts the information it has
taken in during the day. Some people believe that your brain can even solve
problems while you sleep. That's why we say, "Why don't you sleep on it?"
to someone who is worried or confused.
Your brain also spends some time dreaming every night. Scientists do not
really understand dreams. They think that dreams might help your brain
make sense of things that happen during the day. Dreams can be silly
or scary, happy or sad. Often, they don't seem to make sense. In the
morning, you may not remember
your dreams at all.
What happens if you don't get
enough sleep? For one thing,
you'll be pretty grumpy. Missing
sleep can make you clumsy, too.
You are more likely to drop things
or trip over your own feet. You
won't be able to think as well,
either. Even simple tasks are
diffi cult for a tired brain. If you
don't get enough sleep, you won't
be at your best.
If you want to have a good day,
start with a good night's sleep!