All soil starts as rock. Over manyyears, rocks are worn away. This process is called weathering. Many things cause weathering. One cause is temperature changes. When the
temperature is hot, rocks expand. That means they get bigger. Whenthe temperature is cold, rocks contract. That means they get smaller. Expanding and contracting breaks off pieces of the rock.
Sometimes water gets into cracks in
the rock. When the water freezes, the
cracks get bigger. Sometimes tree roots
grow into cracks in rocks. Animals can make a crack bigger as they burrow, or
dig, in the dirt around it. As the crack
becomes bigger, more pieces of rock
break off.
Water can also cause weathering when
it fl ows over a rock. Flowing water
slowly wears away layers of rock. All of
these changes break rocks into smaller
pieces called rock particles.
Rock particles mix with the organic
matter (the remains of dead plants
and animals), water, and air to form
soil. Soil also contains some living
organisms such as bacteria, fungi,
and microbes.
It can take more than 500 years to form one inch of topsoil.
There are over 70,000 kinds of soil in the United States.
Up to 10 tons of animal life can live in an acre of soil.
The spaces between soil particles are called pores—just like on your
skin.
Soils can be classified by the size of
the rock particles they contain. Clay soil
has the smallest rock particles. Sand
has the largest rock particles. The size
of rock particles in silt is larger than
clay and smaller than sand. Soil with
smaller particles can hold more water.
Soil with larger rock particles can hold
less water.
A soil's color can tell you a lot about
it. In general, dark soil is more fertile, or richer, than light soil. Fertile soil can support more life than infertile soil. If
soil is red, it has a lot of iron. Most
plants grow well in this type of soil.
If soil is yellow, it may mean that water does not drain well from the soil and the land is probably poorly drained.
Gray soil is usually poor, too. The gray
color shows that the soil has little iron
or oxygen.
Soil may look like just a pile of dirt.
But life on Earth, including yours truly,
couldn't survive without it!
Earthworms spend almost all
their lives digging through soil.
As they travel through the soil,
they move little pieces of it
around. This creates new spaces
in the soil. These spaces allow
the soil to hold more water. They
also allow more air to move
through the soil. Soil that is full
of earthworms is almost always
healthy.