
Light is a type of energy that makes it possible for us to see the world around us.

One way to change the direction
of light is to let it fall on a shiny
surface for example, a shining
stainless steel plate or a shining
steel spoon can change the
direction of light. The surface of
water can also act like a mirror
and change the path of light.

The change of direction of light by a mirror is called reflection of light.
Image is an optical appearance or counterpart produced by light from an object reflected from a mirror.
The most common
example of a curved mirror is a spherical
mirror.
If the reflecting surface of a spherical
mirror is concave, it is called a concave
mirror. If the reflecting surface is convex,
then it is a convex mirror.
The inner surface of a spoon acts like
a concave mirror, while its outer surface
acts like a convex mirror.
We know that the image of an object
formed by a plane mirror cannot be
obtained on a screen.
An image formed on a screen is called a real image.
An image formed by a plane mirror which could not be
obtained on a screen is called a virtual image.

Concave mirrors are used by doctors for examining
eyes, ears, nose and throat, by dentists
to see an enlarged image of the teeth also the reflectors of torches,
headlights of cars and scooters are concave in shape.

the mirrors used as side mirrors in automobiles are
convex mirrors. Convex mirrors
can form images of objects spread over a
large area which can help the drivers to
see the traffic behind them.


A Lens is a type of mirror which refracts the light instead of reflection. Refraction is the bending of a light when it enters a medium.
The magnifying glass is a type of a lens.
Lenses are widely used in spectacles, telescopes and microscopes.
The lenses which feel thicker in the middle than at the edges
are called convex lenses.
The lenses which feel thinner in the middle than
at the edges are called concave lenses.
A convex lens is called a converging lens because it converges or bends inwards the light falling on it.
The image formed by a concave lens
is always virtual, erect and smaller in
size than the object.
A prism splits a beam of sunlight into seven colours.

Light travels along straight lines.
Any polished or a shining surface acts as a mirror.
An image which can be obtained on a screen is called real image.
An image which cannot be obtained on a screen is called a virtual image.
The image formed by a plane mirror is erect. It is virtual and is of the same size as the object. The image is at the same distance behind the
mirror as the object is in front of it.
In an image formed by a mirror, the left side of the object is seen on the
right side in the image, and right side of the object appears to be on the
left side in the image.
A concave mirror can form a real and inverted image. When the object is
placed very close to the mirror, the image formed is virtual, erect and
magnified.
Type of image formed by a convex mirror is erect, virtual and smaller in size than the object.
A convex lens can form real and inverted image. When the object is
placed very close to the lens, the image formed is virtual, erect and
magnified. When used to see objects magnified, the convex lens is called a magnifying glass.
A concave lens forms erect, virtual and smaller image than the
object.
White light is composed of seven colours.

