A higher speed seems to indicate that a
given distance has been
covered in a shorter time, or a
larger distance covered in a
given time.
The most convenient way to
find out which of the objects is moving faster
is to compare the distances
moved by them in a unit time.
Thus, if we know the distance
covered by two buses in one
hour, we can tell which one is
faster. We call the distance
covered by an object in a unit
time as the speed of the object.
When we say that a car is
moving with a speed of 50
kilometres per hour, it implies
that it will cover a distance of
50 kilometres in one hour. However, a
car seldom moves with a constant speed
for one hour. In fact, it starts moving
slowly and then picks up speed. So,
when we say that the car has a speed of
50 kilometres per hour, we usually
consider only the total distance covered
by it in one hour. We do not bother
whether the car has been moving with
a constant speed or not during that
hour. The speed calculated here is
actually the average speed of the car. In
this book we shall use the term speed
for average speed. So, for us the speed
is the total distance covered divided
by the total time taken.
In everyday life we seldom find objects
moving with a constant speed over long
distances or for long durations of time.
If the speed of an object moving along
a straight line keeps changing, its
motion is said to be non uniform. On
the other hand, an object moving along
a straight line with a constant speed
is said to be in uniform motion. In
this case, the average speed is the
same as the actual speed.
We can determine the speed of a given
object once we can measure the time
taken by it to cover a certain distance.

The time between one
sunrise and the next was called a day.
Similarly, a month was measured from
one new moon to the next. A year was
fixed as the time taken by the earth to
complete one revolution of the sun.
Often we need to measure intervals
of time which are much shorter than a
day. Clocks or watches are perhaps the
most common time measuring devices.
One of the most
well-known periodic motions is that of
a simple pendulum.
A simple pendulum consists of a
small metallic ball or a piece of stone
suspended from a rigid stand by a
thread. The metallic ball
is called the bob of the pendulum.
The to and fro motion of a simple pendulum is an
example of a periodic or an oscillatory motion.
The pendulum is said to have
completed one oscillation when its bob,
starting from its mean position O, moves
to extreme position A, to extreme position B and back to O.
Time period is the time taken by the pendulum to complete one oscillation.
Nowadays most clocks or watches
have an electric circuit with one or more cells. These clocks are called quartz
clocks. The time measured by quartz
clocks is much more accurate than that
by the clocks available earlier.

The basic unit of time is a second. Its
symbol is s. Larger units of time are
minutes (min) and hours (h).
The basic unit of speed is m/s. Of course, it
could also be expressed in other units
such as m/min or km/h.
Rockets, launching satellites into
earth’s orbit, often attain speeds up to
8 km/s. On the other hand, a tortoise
can move only with a speed of about 8
cm/s.

Formula for distance is Speed x Time.
Formula for time taken is Distance/Speed

A speedometer is a device that measures and displays the speed of a vehicle.
Odometer is a device that measures the distance moves by the vehicle.

The distance moved by an object in a unit time is called its speed.
Speed of objects help us to decide which one is moving faster than the
other.
The speed of an object is the distance travelled divided by the time taken
to cover that distance. Its basic unit is metre per second (m/s).
Periodic events are used for the measurement of time. Periodic motion of
a pendulum has been used to make clocks and watches.
Motion of objects can be presented in pictorial form by their
distance-time graphs.
The distance-time graph for the motion of an object moving with a constant
speed is a straight line.

The motion repeated in equal intervals of time is called periodic motion.
Non periodic motion is motion which does not repeat after regular interval of time.