What Is Matter?
Matter is the material that makes up
everything on Earth. Rocks, paper,
wood, water, and even air are made
of matter! Animals, plants, and people
are made of matter, too.
Matter is made up of very tiny particles
called atoms. You can't see these tiny
particles. They are far too small. But
millions and millions of atoms make up
your body, this book, and your pencil.
The milk you drink for lunch, your lunch
tray, and your fork are also made of
millions of atoms.
In some kinds of matter, all the atoms
are the same. Matter that is made of all
one kind of atom is called an element.
There are over 100 known elements on
Earth. Oxygen is one kind of element.
Gold is another. All matter is made from
these elements. Most matter, however,
is made of a combination of elements.
A combination of elements is called
a compound. For example, when you
mix together one part of the element
sodium with one part of the element
chloride, you get table salt. When you combine two parts of the element
hydrogen with one part of the element
oxygen, you get water. Compounds are
made up of groups of atoms called
molecules. A single drop of water
contains millions of water molecules!
The States of Matter
Matter exists in one of three basic
forms: solid, liquid, or gas. These are
called the states of matter. The state
of a substance, or material, depends
on the behavior of its molecules. The
same substance can exist as a solid,
a liquid, or a gas, depending on the
arrangement of its molecules.
Solid
If the molecules that make up a
substance are close together and pull
on each other with a lot of force,
the substance keeps its shape. The
molecules don't move around very
much at all. This kind of matter is
called a solid. A block of wood is solid.
A bowling ball is solid. A solid has
a defi nite size and shape. Ice is an
example of water in its solid state. Liquid
In a liquid, the molecules are farther
apart. They do not pull so tightly
together. The molecules in a liquid
move around more freely. A liquid has
a certain size or volume, but it does not
keep its shape. Instead, it forms itself to
the shape of any container you put it in.
A liquid like water can pour or flow.
Gas The molecules in a gas are far apart.
They move around easily, without
pulling on each other very much at all.
Gas has no shape or size of its own.
It is sometimes hard to believe that gas
is actually matter, but it really is. Take
a deep breath. Feel the pressure of the
air you have just inhaled as it fi lls your
lungs. Or blow up a balloon and see
how the gas presses on the insides of the balloon, making it expand. Water
vapor that evaporates from a puddle on
a hot summer day is an example of
water in its gas state.
Water in Different States
The same substance can exist as a
solid, a liquid, or a gas. Water is a
kind of matter that can change from one
state to another. You can observe these
changes. Take an ice cube out of the
freezer and set in on a saucer. Check
it every few minutes. You will notice
the solid turning to a liquid right before
your eyes. Leave the saucer on the
table for a day or two. You will notice
that the water gradually disappears. It
is changing into a gas and mixing with
the air. You cannot see it, but it is still
there.
The molecules in a solid are very close together.
The molecules in a liquid are not as close together.
The molecules in a gas are very far apart.