You have probably heard a guitar
playing. Maybe you heard a
guitarist at a concert. Or maybe you
listened to a song on the radio. Do you
know how the guitar created the music?
The answer is waves of sound.
A sound is created when an object
vibrates, or moves back and forth.
These vibrations make sound waves
that move the air around the object.
When the sound waves enter our ears,
our brain interprets, or understands,
them as different sounds.
Every sound has a different frequency.
Frequency is the number of sound
waves that are created in one second.
If there are a lot of waves, the
sound has a high frequency. A high
frequency creates a high-pitch sound.
For example, a whistle has a high
frequency. If the sound produces few
waves per second, it has a low
frequency and produces a low pitch
sound. A truck engine has a low
frequency.
Now let's look at a guitar. A guitar
usually has six strings. A person plays
the guitar by plucking the strings.
Plucking makes the strings vibrate.
These vibrations create sounds.
If you look closely at a guitar's strings,
you'll see that they are not all the same.
Some are thin. Some are thick. The
thick strings vibrate slowly. The thin
strings vibrate quickly. This means that
the thick strings make a lower pitch
sound than the thin strings.
A guitar's strings are connected to
tuning keys. These keys let the
guitarist change how tight the strings
are. A tight string vibrates more quickly
than a loose string. This means the
tight string will make a higher pitch
sound.
But a guitar with six strings can make
a lot more than six sounds! Making a
string shorter can change the sound
it produces. A guitarist does this by
pressing his fi nger on the frets. Frets
are special ridges on the neck of the
guitar. Now the string will vibrate at a
different frequency. That means it will
make a different sound.
A guitarist can pluck each string
by itself. This plucking creates a
series of notes that can form a
melody. A melody is simple, but it
isn't always very interesting. To make
more complex music, a guitarist plays
chords. A chord is created when
several notes are played at the same
time. To play a chord, a guitarist places
his fingers in different places on the
neck of the guitar. Then he plays all
the strings together. Each string makes
a different sound. These sounds blend
together to make music.
Have you ever held a rubber band
between your fingers and plucked it?
If you have, you know that the sound
it makes is not very loud. The same is
true of guitar strings. A vibrating guitar
string does not make a loud sound.
This is because the guitar string does
not vibrate hard enough to move a lot
of air. Since only a small amount of air
moves, the sound is hard to hear.
To solve this problem, guitar strings
are connected to a wooden sound
box. When the strings vibrate, the box
vibrates, too. This creates a bigger
vibration. That bigger vibration creates
a louder sound.
Next time you are listening to a
guitar, think about those sound waves
moving through the air. If you use your
imagination, you can almost feel the
music playing!