Have you ever watched kittens play?
They chase their tails. They jump
and pounce on each other. They grab
a hanging string. They climb on each
other and bite ears or paws.
All this play is a lot of fun. But it is also a
way to learn. Playing teaches important
skills. The kittens will need these skills
later, when they hunt for their food.
A pet cat usually doesn't have trouble
fi nding food. But cats that live in the
wild have to hunt. Hunting is probably
the most important skill kittens have to
learn. One way they learn this skill is
by playing.
Most cats are solitary hunters. That
means they hunt by themselves. A cat
catches its prey by stalking it. It creeps
slowly toward its prey, hiding so the
prey can't see it. When the cat gets
close enough, it pounces. Then it bites
its prey to kill it. Small cats eat mice,
birds, lizards, and insects. Large cats
eat bigger animals, such as wild pigs.
When kittens play, they show many
things that are also done while hunting.
One kitten might see its mother's tail
waving back and forth. The kitten
crouches down. Then it begins to creep
forward. It is stalking Mom's tail! When
the kitten gets close enough to the tail,
it pounces. It lands on the tail and
rolls over. Its paws are wrapped around
the tail to hold it. It might even bite
the tail. These movements stalking,
pouncing, grabbing, and biting are
very important. They are the same
ones the kitten will use later when it is
hunting.
Pet kittens also play with toys. Have
you ever seen a kitten chase a ball
or smack a rolled-up piece of paper?
This behavior teaches skills that the
kitten could use to catch a mouse or a
cricket. Some kittens like to jump high
to catch a feather on a string. If that
kitten wanted to catch a bird, it would
do the same jump.
Some wild cats use special movements
when they hunt. Cheetahs sometimes
use one paw to hit their prey in the
side and knock it down. Scientists have
watched cheetah kittens play. They
saw the playing kittens use this same
paw-slap.
A lion cub often knocks another cub
down by placing one paw on the other
cub's shoulder. Adult lions sometimes
catch antelope the same way. The
lion places one paw on the antelope's
shoulder. Then it pulls the antelope
down. Once again, a play behavior
teaches the lion a hunting skill.
Kittens aren't the only cats that play.
Adult cats also play. You may have
seen two adult cats wrestling. One cat
will bite the other. Or it might smack the
other cat with its paw. The cats look
like they are fighting. But they are not.
They are practicing their fighting skills
and keeping their muscles in shape.
Cats may also play together to make a
connection with other members of their
family or group.
Cats seem to know the difference
between playing and fighting. When
a cat plays, it retracts its claws.
This means it pulls its claws into its paw. Retracting the claws keeps one
cat from hurting the other. Cats also
pretend to bite each other when they
play. But their teeth don't break the
skin. Just like people, playing is best
when no one gets hurt!
Cats aren't the only animals
who like to play. Many wild
animals also play. Some
monkeys play hide-and-seek
or king-of-the-mountain.
Beavers wrestle and splash in
the water. Seals play keepaway
and tag with balls of
seaweed. Bears chase and
wrestle each other. A kind
of bird called the kea hangs
upside down from a branch
and swings. All of these
behaviors help animals by
sharpening their survival skills.