James Eads (Eedz) was born in Indiana in the year 1820. His family
moved around a lot, so James did not get very much schooling. Finally,
the family settled in St. Louis, Missouri, on the banks of the Mississippi
River. There, James got a job in a store. The storekeeper had a lot of books.
James was curious, and he liked to read. The storekeeper let James read
his books. James learned a lot. His head was full of ideas. He liked to figure
out how to make things and solve problems.
James used to wander down to the Mississippi River and watch the boats
go by. He knew that the boats sometimes sank. These boats carried many
goods that had come to rest on the muddy river bottom. Some of this
cargo was very valuable. James thought he could find a way to collect
these things. So he invented a special boat. The boat was connected to
a diving bell.
A diving bell is a small vessel that allows people to work underwater. An air
hose connects the bell with a boat on the surface of the water.
James could get inside the bell and go to the river bottom. He was able to
pick up all kinds of objects. He brought the lost cargo to the surface and
sold it. In just 10 years, James became a wealthy man.
When the Civil War began in 1861, James wanted to help the United States.
He offered to build boats that were covered with sheets of iron. With these
boats, the Union could control the rivers. James hired 4,000 men and built
the boats. The boats played an important role in winning the war.
When the war ended, the country began to grow. Trains were a very
important form of transportation. A bridge was needed to carry trains across
the Mississippi River. James was asked to build the bridge. He hired many
men to help him build the bridge. The work began in 1867.
James planned the bridge with care. It would have three arches. It would be
made of steel. James wanted the bridge to be very strong. He would use
only the fi nest steel. He checked each shipment of steel. If it wasn't good
enough, James sent it back to the factory.
Building the bridge was a tough job. The men had to dig the mud away from
the river bottom until they reached solid rock. This was hard and dangerous
work. James built a floating hospital to care for anyone who got hurt on the
job. It took seven years to build the bridge. When it was fi nished in 1874, it
was the largest bridge in the world. A railroad track was built on the bridge.
Later, a highway was added for automobiles. Thousands and thousands of
trains, trucks, and automobiles have crossed the Mississippi River on this
amazing bridge.
The people of St. Louis decided to name the bridge after James. It is called
the James B. Eads Bridge. If you go to St. Louis, you can see this graceful
bridge. Many people think it is one of
the most beautiful bridges ever built.
James B. Eads began life as a poor
boy. He did not have a chance
to go to school. He had to learn
everything on his own. But he
became one of America's foremost
engineers. He was a successful
inventor. He was a creative thinker.
He was able to figure out how
to build almost anything he could
imagine. The James B. Eads
Bridge is a great reminder of this
remarkable man.