You probably see rocks every day.
Rocks are not alive. But did you
know that one type of rock is made
from parts of creatures that were once
alive? That rock is called limestone.
Limestone is a type of rock called
sedimentary rock. Most limestone is
formed from the shells of tiny animals
that live in water. Limestone is also
formed from the skeletons of an animal
called coral. When the animals die,
their shells float to the bottom of the
ocean and break into many pieces.
Over thousands of years, the layers
of shell pieces build up. Upper layers
press down on lower layers. The layers
of shell pieces turn into solid rock.
This rock is limestone. Sometimes you
can see tiny pieces of animal shells in
limestone.
Limestone is very soft compared to
most rocks. Flowing water can easily
wear away pieces of limestone. That
is why many caves are made out of
limestone.
Sometimes nature carves limestone
into interesting shapes. In China there
is a beautiful rock formation. Over
thousands of years, rain dissolved a
huge block of limestone. Harder rocks
within the limestone did not dissolve.
These rocks can still be seen. They
look like eggs sticking out of the
ground.
If you find a rock that you think is made
of limestone, there is an easy way to
check. Fill an eyedropper with strong
vinegar. Then squeeze a few drops
onto the rock. Watch the rock through a
magnifying glass. If it is limestone, the
surface of the rock will fizz and bubble.
The vinegar reacts with the limestone to
produce a gas.
Limestone is often used for building.
The rock is dug out of the ground in
places called quarries. Limestone is cut
into large blocks. These blocks can be
used to build churches or other large
buildings. In Europe, many old buildings
are made of limestone. Because the
rock is soft, it can be carved. You
can often see these carvings in old
churches, palaces, and other buildings.
Limestone is also crushed into tiny
stones. This crushed stone is used to
build roads and sidewalks.
Ancient people also used limestone to
make art. In England there are many
limestone cliffs. People carved pictures
of horses and other things into the
limestone. These huge carvings can
still be seen today.
Limestone truly has an amazing story.
It is formed from parts of once-living
animals in the ocean. These parts are
changed into a special kind of rock.
People might use that rock to create a
work of art or the pavement under your
feet. That's a long way to travel from the
bottom of the sea!
There are three types of rocks:
Sedimentary rocks are formed
when particles of matter are laid
down in many layers and pressed
together.
Igneous rocks are formed when
hot liquid rock from the center of
the Earth comes to the surface,
cools, and hardens.
Metamorphic rocks are formed
when heat and pressure inside
the Earth change one kind of
rock into another kind of rock.