If you hold a compass in your hand,
the needle will always point toward
the North Pole. This is true no matter
where you are on Earth. Whether you're
on a ship in the middle of the Pacific
Ocean, walking down a busy street
in Paris, or standing on top of Mount
Everest, your compass will still point
north.
The most common type of compass is
the magnetic compass. A magnetic
compass works because the Earth has
a magnetic field. Scientists think the
red hot, molten iron in the middle of
the Earth's center, or core, causes this
magnetic field. As the Earth spins, this
liquid iron spins, too. Scientists think
that the spinning liquid iron creates
a weak magnetic force. This happens
because iron is a magnetic material.
So why does a compass needle always
point north? First you need to know that
a compass needle is really a magnet.
Every magnet has a south pole and a
north pole.
Now, imagine that the spinning liquid
inside the Earth is like a huge, buried
magnet. The south end of the magnet
rests on the North Pole. The north
end rests on the South Pole. When it
comes to magnets, opposites attract.
That means that the south end of one
magnet will attract the north end of
another magnet. So the North Pole
(which has the south end of the Earth's
magnet) attracts the north end of the
compass needle. That's why the needle
always swings around to point north.
The Earth's magnetic field is very weak,
so it can only move small objects. For
this reason the compass needle has
to be very lightweight. It also needs to
be able to spin easily without friction
slowing it down.
Along with the needle, a compass also
includes a compass card. This card
is marked with four cardinal points
that show the four major directions-
north, east, south, and west. Between
each cardinal point is an intercardinal
point-northeast, southeast, southwest,
and northwest. A compass card may
also be marked with the 360 degrees
that make up a circle. These markings
help the person using the compass
figure out the exact direction of travel.
People have been using compasses
for almost a thousand years. Chinese
navigators used them to guide their
ships during the 1100s. These early
compasses were very simple. They
were just a piece of magnetic iron
floating on a cork in a bowl of water.
Still, the navigators would have been
lost without them! By using a compass,
these navigators could figure out which
way to head, even if they were in the
middle of the ocean, or if the sun had
disappeared behind the clouds.
So if you want to make sure you're
not lost or if you just want to have
some fun ,carry a compass in your
pocket. It will always point you in the
right direction.