"Only YOU can prevent forest
fires!" Smokey the Bear has
been telling us to be careful with
matches for many years. And it is
still good advice. Forest fires are
dangerous. They can burn down
homes, harm animals, and destroy
trees.
But forest fires are not all bad. In fact,
ecologists have learned that fires are
a natural part of life in the forest.
They know that fire sometimes helps
a forest stay healthy.
How does fire help? As you know, a
forest is an area where many trees
grow. Over time some of the trees die.
Branches fall to the ground. Leaves
collect on the forest floor. This dead
material is called litter. Fire can clear
the litter away, leaving more space for
the trees to grow. If the litter is not too
deep, the fire burns along the ground.
Fire in the Forest:
Friend or Foe?
It stays low. It may scorch the trunks of
large trees, but it cannot reach up into
their branches. The burned litter also
acts as fertilizer, giving nutrients to the
trees.
Without fires, too much litter may build
up on the forest floor. It may become
very deep and thick. A careless camper
or a lightning strike may start a fire.
Now, the fire fighters cannot stop it.
The fire is too big and too hot. The
fire blazes high into the treetops, killing
thousands of trees.
But these dead trees are still very
important. Many of them remain
standing for years. They are called
snags. Insects bore into the dead wood.
Woodpeckers and other birds eat the
insects. These birds also make nests in
the dead trees. In fact, burned forests
provide important habitat for a number
of bird species.
Fire helps the forest in another way.
Many forest plants have seeds that
can only sprout if they are heated by
fire. Lodgepole pinecones only open
when exposed to fire. Other seeds
have tough coatings that must be
burned away. Many non-native species
of plants are killed by fire. These
are plants that do not belong in the
forest. Fire helps to maintain a healthy
community of forest plants.
Many fires occur naturally in the forest.
Most of them are started by lightning
strikes. They usually happen in the
summer when the weather is hot and
dry. For many years, fire fighters raced
to put out every forest fire. But now,
many fires are allowed to burn. Fire
fighters try to protect houses and other
buildings. People who live in or near the
forest must understand that fire might
be a threat.
Everyone should follow Smokey's rules.
No one should ever play with matches.
When we go out in the woods, we
should make sure to put our campfires
out before we leave our campsites. Fire
is serious and can be deadly. We still
need Smokey to remind us to be careful
with fire. But we also know that fire can
sometimes be a friend.